.TH scanbd 8 "20 Dec 2012" "@PACKAGENAME@ @PACKAGEVERSION@" "Scanner button daemon"
.IX scanbd
.SH NAME
scanbd\- Scanner button daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP Manager mode
.B scanbd
.B  \-m
.B [\-c 
.I configfile
.B ] [\-f]
.B  [\-d
.I [debuglevel]
.B  ] [\-s]
.B  [\-t
.I device
.B \-a
.I action
.B ]
.TP Polling mode
.B scanbd
.B [\-c 
.I configfile
.B ] [\-f]
.B  [\-d
.I [debuglevel]
.B ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B scanbd
is a scanner button monitoring daemon that can trigger execution of scripts when
a button is pressed.
Scanbd (the scanner button daemon) in polling mode opens and polls the scanner 
and therefore locks the device. So no other application can access the device 
directly (open the /dev/..., or via libusb, etc). 

To enable scanning from applications, we use a second instance of scanbd in the
so called "manager-mode": this scanbd instance is configured as a "proxy" for 
saned to access the scanner from an application. In manager mode, scanbd 
listens for requests in the saned network port for scanning requests.
All applications therefor need to use the "net backend to access a scanner.

If a scan request arrives to scanbd (in manager-mode) on the sane-port, scanbd 
requests the scanbd scanner polling daemon instance by sending it a 
dbus-message (default) or a posix-signal (SIGUSR1) (signal-mode) to release 
the sacanner. Then it starts the real saned which scans and sends the data back
to the requesting application. When the scanning is done and saned exits, the 
scanbd-manager restarts the polling by sending a second dbus-message (or the 
posix-signal SIGUSR2) to the scanbd daemon and ends execution. 
The polling scanbd now reenables polling of the devices.
   
Scanbd can be configured at compile time to ether use sane to poll the scannner
or use the scanbuttond backends to do so.

.B Note:
Please note that the scanbd running in manager mode acts as a proxy to saned. 
This means that all scanner applications must be configured to use the net 
backend to access the scanner. Direct access will not be possible.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-m --manager
run scanbd in manager mode (default is polling mode). This option is used to 
start scanbd as wrapper around saned from inetd or xinetd. Scanbd will request 
the polling scanbd to stop polling the scanners and then starts saned 
that will handle the actual scanning.
.TP
.B \-c --config
.I configfile
Use <configfile>  instead of the default @SCANBDCFGDIR@/scanbd.conf configuration file.
.TP
.B \-d --debug
.I debuglevel
turn debug mode on
.TP
.B \-s --signal
use signals SIGUSR1/ SIGUSR2 instead of dbus messages to request the 
polling scanbd to stop / restart polling
.TP
.B \-t --trigger
Trigger action for 
.I device 
(numerical)
.TP
.B \-a --action
.I action 
(numerical) to be triggered
.TP
.B \-f --foreground
Run scanbd in the foreground
.TP 
When no options are given, run in polling mode
.SH MAIN SCANBD CONFIGURATION
Scanbd is configured trough scanbd.conf ( @SCANBDCFGDIR@/scanbd.conf or 
the file pointed out by the 
.B \-c <config-file>
Scanbd shall normally be started in polling mode from init using your 
operating
systems start method. See the intergration directory in the scanbd 
sources to see what is avaialable for your OS and
distribution. 
.SH MANAGER MODE SCANBD CONFIGURATION
Scanbd im manager mode must be setup very similar to the way a stand-alone 
saned must be setup.
.SH INETD CONFIGURATION FOR MANAGER MODE
For
.B scanbd
to work properly in its default mode of operation, it is also necessary to add
a configuration line to
.IR /etc/inetd.conf .
Note that your inetd must support IPv6 if you
want to connect to scanbd over IPv6 ; xinetd and openbsd-inetd are known to
support IPv6, check the documentation for your inetd daemon.
.PP
The configuration line normally looks like this:
.PP
.RS
sane\-port stream tcp nowait scanbd.scanbd @SBINDIR@/scanbd scanbd -m
.RE
.PP
However, if your system uses
.BR tcpd (8)
for additional security screening, you may want to disable scanbd
access control by putting ``+'' in
.IR scanbd.conf
and use a line of the following form in
.IR /etc/inetd.conf
instead:
.PP
.RS
sane\-port stream tcp nowait scanbd.scanbd /usr/sbin/tcpd @SBINDIR@/scanbd -m
.RE
.PP
Note that both examples assume that there is a
.B scanbd
group and a
.B scanbd
user.  If you follow this example, please make sure that the 
access permissions on the special device are set such that
.B scanbd
can access the scanner (the program generally needs read and
write access to scanner devices).
.PP
If xinetd is installed on your system instead of inetd the following example
for xinetd.conf may be helpful:
.PP
.RS
.ft CR
.nf
# default: off
# description: The sane server accepts requests 
# for network access to a local scanner via the
# network.
service sane\-port
{
   port        = 6566
   socket_type = stream
   wait        = no
   user        = scanbd
   group       = scanbd
   server      = @SBINDIR@/scanbd 
   server_args = -m
}
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.PP
Finally, it is also necessary to add a line of the following form to
.IR /etc/services :
.PP
.RS
sane\-port 6566/tcp # SANE network scanner daemon
.RE
.PP
The official IANA short name for port 6566 is "sane\-port". The older name "sane"
is now deprecated.
.RE
.PP
Scanbd does not do access control, but it relies on the access control done by i
saned.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sane (7),
.BR saned (8),
.BR sane\-dll (5),
.BR sane\-net (5)
.br
.I http://http://scanbd.sourceforge.net/
.SH AUTHOR
Louis Lagendijk
